[Music]
three Office of Strategic Services
although various defense and civilian
departments and agencies of the federal
government maintained units for
intelligence purposes during World War
two it was during this period of
international tumult that the first
centralized intelligence structure came
into existence the man proposing the new
intelligence entity was William J
Donovan a much decorated hero of World
War one an attorney a Republican an
internationalist and an ardent foe of
totalitarianism quote President
Roosevelt welcomed the suggestion of a
single agency which would serve as a
clearinghouse for all intelligence as
well as an organ of counter propaganda
and a training center for what were you
familiar
special-operations and invited colonel
donovan to be its head at first Donovan
was reluctant his World War 1 antipathy
to desk generalship was still strong and
though he was now 58 he preferred to
lead a combat division but the prospect
of organizing a unified intelligence
sabotage and subversive warfare unit the
first in American history was most
tempting after a lengthy discussion with
the president he agreed to form the new
agency under the somewhat misleading
title of coordinator of information and
quote footnote Corey Ford Donovan of OSS
Boston
little brown & Company 1970 page 108 and
footnote born in Buffalo New York on New
Year's Day 1883 William Joseph Donovan's
paternal grandparents had emigrated to
the United States from Ireland in about
1840 his father sold real estate at one
time and later operated an insurance
business after attending st. Joseph's
Collegiate Institute and Niagara
University ba 1905 Williams studied at
Columbia University LLB 1907 and was
admitted to the New York Bar in 1908
four years later he formed his
first law partnership and began his
military career enlisting in the first
cavalry of the New York National Guard
he saw nine months of active duty along
the Rio Grande during the Mexican
campaign in 1916 when the United States
entered the European hostilities the
following year Donovan was assistant
chief of staff of the 27th division of
the New York National Guard with the
formation of the 42nd rainbow division
he was assigned to the 165th infantry
and subsequently became a colonel with
the fighting 69th Regiment wounded three
times during 21 months of active service
overseas Donovan became one of the most
decorated soldiers of the great war his
own government awarded him the
Congressional Medal of Honor the
Distinguished Service Cross and the
Distinguished Service Medal he was the
only member of the Armed Forces to
receive these three cherished
decorations during World War one in the
summer of 1919 returned to civilian life
and about to resume his law practice in
Buffalo Donovan and his wife of five
years left the United States on a long
deferred honeymoon to Japan it was then
that he began his intelligence
activities quote they had relaxed in
Tokyo but a few days when the American
ambassador Roland Morris called Donovan
on urgent business Morris was about to
depart for Siberia to evaluate the
reportedly unstable status of the white
Russian government a Tomsk headed by
Admiral alexander kolchak
and advised the State Department whether
the Kolchak regime should be supported
by the United States he needed someone
with Donovan's background and training
to accompany him on his confidential
mission Ruth Donovan reconciled herself
to what would become a pattern of
similar missions over the next 40 years
in quote a variety of other government
positions soon beckoned Donovan he
became a US Attorney for the Western
District of New York in 1922 shortly
thereafter he served as a delegate to a
Canadian American customs conference
held in Ottawa
which produced a Treaty of cooperation
and preventing international crimes in
1924 Donovan was appointed assistant
attorney general in charge of federal
criminal matters the following year he
became the assistant to attorney General
John G Sergeant a position he held until
1929 returning to New York
Donovan acted as counsel for the panel
revising the state laws pertaining to
the Public Service Commission during the
1930s he traveled to Ethiopia as an
impartial observer of the invasion by
Italy next he was in Spain scrutinizing
the development of the civil war in that
land through friends and contacts in
Europe he kept well informed on the
progress of totalitarianism on the
continent with the outbreak of war in
1939 Donovan became a valuable operative
for neutral America in July 1940 he went
to Great Britain to observe the Blitz
for Secretary of the Navy Frank Knox
upon his return he made a vigorous
effort to publicize England's ability to
survive the German assault and to secure
aid for the embattled British in
December he was again on a
reconnaissance mission touring Gibraltar
Malta Egypt Greece Bulgaria Yugoslavia
Turkey Cyprus Palestine Spain Portugal
and again to Great Britain with his
observations on the military political
and economic conditions in these nations
he also offered the suggestion for
creating a Central Intelligence Agency
the impetus for such an organization
derived not only from felt need for such
an entity at the federal level but also
from a close familiarity with the
special operations structure of the
British government once the American
counterpart to the British intelligence
office was established
Donovan became its chief but served from
the fall of 1941 to the spring of 1943
without a government salary or an
active-duty military rank
in the summer of 1941 four months before
the Japanese struck Pearl Harbor
President Roosevelt issued a directive
designating a coordinator of information
which said quote by virtue of the
authority vested in me as president of
the United States and as
commander-in-chief of the Army and Navy
of the United States it is ordered as
follows one there is hereby established
the position of coordinator of
information with authority to collect
and analyze all information and data
which may bear upon national security to
correlate such information and data and
to make such information and data
available to the President and to such
departments and officials of the
government as the president may
determine and to carry out when
requested by the president such
supplementary activities as may
facilitate the securing of information
important for national security not now
available to the government to the
several departments and agencies of the
government shall make available to the
coordinator of information all and any
such information and data relating to
national security and as the coordinator
with the approval of the President may
from time to time request three the
coordinator of information may appoint
such committees consisting of
appropriate representatives of the
various departments and agencies of the
government as he made name necessary to
assist him in the performance of his
functions for nothing in the duties and
responsibilities of the coordinator of
information shall in any way interfere
with or impair the duties and
responsibilities of the regular military
and naval advisors of the President as
commander-in-chief of the army and navy
five within the limits of such funds as
may be allocated to the coordinator of
information by the president the
coordinator may employ necessary
personnel and make provision for the
necessary supplies facilities and
services 6 William J Donovan is hereby
designated as coordinator of information
end quote
dated chill
11 1941 this purposely vague directive
provided Donovan with an intelligence
function which might include special
actions requested by the President and a
propaganda mission after a year of
operations it was felt that the
propaganda duties of the coordinator
were inappropriate to his intelligence
activities subsequently On June 13 1942
these propaganda responsibilities were
transferred to the newly created office
of War Information established within
the office for emergency management by
military order of the same date the
coordinators office was renamed the
Office of Strategic Services and placed
under the jurisdiction of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff
Donovan's new Charter said quote by
virtue of the authority vested in me as
president of the United States and as
commander-in-chief of the Army and Navy
of the United States it is ordered as
follows 1 the office of coordinator of
information established by order of July
11th 1941 exclusive of the Foreign
information activities transferred to
the Office of War Information by
executive order of June 13 1942 shall
hereafter be known as the Office of
Strategic Services and is hereby
transferred to the jurisdiction of the
United States Joint Chiefs of Staff to
the Office of Strategic Services shall
perform the following duties a collect
and analyze such strategic information
as may be required by the United States
Joint Chiefs of Staff B plan and operate
such special services as may be directed
by the United States Joint Chiefs of
Staff 3 at the head of the Office of
Strategic Services shall be a director
of Strategic Services who shall be
appointed by the President and who shall
perform his duties under the direction
and supervision of the United States
Joint Chiefs of Staff for William J
Donovan is hereby appointed as director
of Strategic Services 5 the order of
July 11th 1941 is hereby revoked
quote although this directive clarified
the duties of Donovan's organization it
did not ensure the gadfly agency's
operational status quote executive order
nine one eight two divesting Donovan of
propaganda production responsibilities
had ensured at least for the moment the
continuance of Donovan's controversial
experiment in organized intelligence and
paramilitary service but the transfer of
its jurisdiction from the President to
the Joint Chiefs of Staff which Donovan
had personally requested posed even more
critical problems now the struggling CEO
I had a new supervisor as well as a new
name and its functions and the extent of
its authority were entirely dependent
upon the decision of the JCS this meant
that all funds to operate OSS must come
from Congress primarily the House and
Senate Appropriations committees and its
budget requests must first be submitted
to and approved by the gimlet-eyed
Bureau of the budget the immediate
problem of maintaining OSS during the
transition period was temporarily
bridged by instructions from the JCS
that it should carry on as usual pending
further study of its wartime functions
but donovan and his top staff were
keenly aware that OSS faced a critical
struggle to convince the joint chiefs
and other ranking officials of the
government not only the OSS should be
given adequate written authority and
manpower and supplies but in fact that
it should exist at all
end quote preparing his own
Donavan with staff assistants drafted
and redrafted a proposed OSS directive
establishing the agency's operational
authority he was adamant the OSS should
never be absorbed by or subject to the
control of any other government office
or the Armed Forces in brief OSS would
assist and serve all segments of the
federal structure but would be
subservient to none his painstaking
effort completed Donovan forwarded the
model directive and an explanatory
memorandum to the Joint Chiefs his time
was then consumed by preparations for
Operation Torch the invasion of North
Africa and the execution of this first
assault against the totalitarian forces
holding the old world captive among
other triumphs deriving from the
incursion the quote pre-invasion charts
and estimates and the OSS pioneered
technique of keeping commanders informed
of conditions ashore up to the very
moment of landing had clearly
demonstrated the new agency's value but
Donovan's draft directive submitted to
the JCS before torch was still being
debated in committee hearings early in
December Donovan had an informal chat
with his old friend Frank Knox Secretary
of the Navy knox was surprised to learn
that so long a period had elapsed
without any formal or comprehensive
instructions from the Joint Chiefs and
he took up the matter with President
Roosevelt who told General George
C Marshall chairman of the JCS I wish
you would give bill Donovan a little
elbow room to operate in shortly
afterward the Joint Chiefs appointed
Committees of high-ranking officers
including Admiral Frederick Horne and
generals Joseph T McNerney and Albert
Whitmer to make a personal inspection of
OSS and recommend what should be done
the committee promptly rendered reports
which were not made available to OSS and
on December 23rd 1942 six months after
it was created the agency received its
long-awaited directive
almost word-for-word the draft which
Donovan had prepared in the field of
intelligence OSS was given the
independent status which Donovan sought
climaxing the bitter feud with the rival
service agencies the joint psychological
warfare board on which OSS had a
minority of members was abolished by the
JCS and fourth OSS was the sole agency
of the JCS authorized to operate in the
fields of intelligence sabotage and
counter espionage to conduct guerrilla
operations and to direct resistance
groups in all enemy occupied or
controlled territory general Marshalls
stated in a personal letter to Colonel
Donovan written on the same day the
directive was issued I regret that
after voluntarily coming under the
jurisdiction of the JCS your
organization has not had smoother
sailing nevertheless it has rendered
invaluable service particularly with
reference to the North African campaign
I am hopeful that the new Office of
Strategic Services Directive will
eliminate most if not all of your
difficulties end quote
Donovan's original idea for a
centralized intelligence agency had
derived from his exposure to the British
intelligence structure during his 1940
observation missions faced with the
necessity of quickly organizing an
effective intelligence operation for the
United States
Donovan again relied upon the British
quote William Stephenson had developed
an undercover organization in the United
States called British security
cordinator BSC which was staffed with
experienced officers and they supplied
the pioneer American agency at the
outset with much of its secret
intelligence experts in counter
espionage and subversive propaganda and
special operations were put at Donovan's
disposal and he was shown their methods
of communicating with resistance forces
behind the lines in the early days Co I
agents were trained at a school near
Toronto Canada later a model for some of
the training schools of OSS
Donovan said after the war Bill
Stevenson and the British intelligence
service gave us an enormous Head Start
which we could not otherwise have had
end quote
with information and expertise being
supplied by the British the next task
involved structuring the new
intelligence entity quote Colonel
Donovan brought a trained legal mind to
the task of organizing his fast-growing
agency OSS was to employ some 30,000
people by the war's end and set it up as
he would prepare a trial case with
research experts to analyze the evidence
and skilled assistance to conduct the
prosecution at the top of the chart
Donovan as director and G Edward Buxton
as assistant director and beside them
were the Planning Group and the planning
staff under Donovan were his three
deputy directors with staff but not
command status who were charged with the
duty of coordinating the three main OSS
functions intelligence research and
analysis secret intelligence counter
espionage and collateral offices
operations sabotage guerrilla warfare
psychological warfare and related
activities and schools and training a
chief of services supervise the work of
the offices of budget procurement
finance and related problems in addition
there were some 18 essential offices
which could not be assigned effectively
to any subordinate command
thus the Security office reported
directly to Donovan
since security involved all procedures
and all personnel regardless of rank
other offices which served the entire
organization were also placed under the
director including medical services
special funds field photographic
communications Navy and army commands
which handled the administrative
problems of OSS naval and military
personnel and a liaison office to
maintain relations with other government
agencies
the functions of the principal branches
were quote research and analysis RNA to
produce the economic military social and
political studies and estimates for
every strategic area from Europe to the
Far East secret intelligence ASI to
gather on-the-spot information from
within neutral and enemy territory
Special Operations ASO to conduct
sabotage and work with resistance forces
counterespionage x2 to protect our own
and Allied intelligence operations and
to identify enemy agents overseas morale
operations MO to create and disseminate
black covert propaganda operational
groups OG to train and supply and lead
guerrilla forces in enemy territory
maritime unit mu to conduct maritime
sabotage schools and training SMT in
overall charge of the assessment and
training of personnel both in the United
States and overseas end quote
not only did this departmentalization
increase the agency's effectiveness but
it helped to maintain security each
branch of OSS had its own secret file of
information which was available to
members of other branches only on an
official need-to-know basis donovan
himself was not told the real names of
some of his most successful agents nor
did he seek to learn them complete
anonymity was the best safeguard against
detection by the enemy with the
establishment of the office of
coordinator of information a recruitment
of new faces into the intelligence
system was inaugurated most would
continue their service with OSS until
the end of the war quote heading
Donovan's early staff was Colonel Edward
Buxton a close friend since World War
one days who left his business in Rhode
Island to become the assistant director
of the COI
James Murphy formerly Donovan's
secretary when he was Assistant Attorney
General was made his personal assistant
dr. William L Langer distinguished
Coolidge professor of history at Harvard
who had seen action as a sergeant in the
Argonne and Assam Michelle headed the
key research and analysis division
following the resignation of dr. James
Phinney Baxter president of Williams
College and a brilliant administrator
who served briefly as the first chief of
RNA dr. Edward s Mason later director of
Harvard's School of Public
Administration and a prominent economist
Dean Calvin Hoover of Duke University
and the late dr. Edward Meade of
Princeton Institute for Advanced Study
and dr. Henry field curator of physical
anthropology at Chicago's Field Museum
joined Donovan's expanding unit David ke
Bruce later to be named US ambassador to
the court of st. James's came to
Washington to head Co eyes
special activities Bruce sa be the
agency's secret intelligence branch and
MP Goodfellow left his newspaper
business to head the sabotage branch
special Activities good fellow or s AG
both of these branches existed in the
training stages only since the u.s. was
not yet at war Robert II sure would
noted American playwright and an
intimate of President Roosevelt assumed
responsibility for the foreign
information service FIS end quote
when OSS was created sherwood became
director of overseas operations at the
Office of War Information most of the
personnel staying with OSS donned
uniforms and held some type of rank in
the Armed Forces
nevertheless they took their direction
from Donovan and were not subjected to
the command of the Army and Navy quote
from the beginnings of Co I before Pearl
Harbor to the termination of OSS after
v-j day the research and analysis branch
was the very core of the agency the
cloak-and-dagger exploits of agents info
traded behind the lines captured the
public imagination but the prosaic and
colorless grubbing of dr. Langer's
scientists largely overlooked by the
press provided far and away the greater
contribution to America's wartime
intelligence from the files of foreign
newspapers from obscure technical
journals from reports of international
business firms and labor organizations
they extracted pertinent figures and
data with infinite patience they fitted
the facts together into a mosaic of
information the raw material of strategy
Donavan called it on which the president
and his chiefs of staff could form their
operational decisions end quote
footnote popular accounts of OSS
cloak-and-dagger activities which were
often heroic and valiant efforts may be
found in Stewart Alsop and Thomas Braden
Subrosa the OSS and American espionage
New York rain'll and Hitchcock 1946 and
Corey Ford and Alister McBain
cloak-and-dagger the secret story of OSS
New York
Random House 1946 an excellent account
of OSS field operations may be found in
our Harris Smith OSS the secret history
of America's first Central Intelligence
Agency Berkeley University of California
Press 1972 and footnote the aren't a
branch gained sufficient prestige that
other federal agencies sought its
assistance the board of economic warfare
for example asked RNA to determine if
Soviet requests for American goods under
lend-lease
were justified by the conditions of
their economy on this particular matter
OSS findings proved to be more accurate
than those of British intelligence
footnote C Ford page 152 for an
appreciation of the general approach of
RNA to intelligence analysis C Sherman
Kent strategic intelligence for American
world policy Princeton Princeton
University Press 1949
and footnote quote at the start
Donovan established an R and a Board of
analysts consisting of half-a-dozen
scholars each of whom took charge of
some major activity and played an
important role in recruiting further
staff members in this way he was able to
secure the high classifications needed
to get the very best people for a
General Directorate subsequently this
board of analysts provided the model for
the CIE a board of national estimates
set up in 1950 by dr. Langer for general
Bedell Smith due to its many sided and
brilliant staff RNA was credited with
producing the most accurate estimates
made by the Allies in World War two and
quote in addition to its research and
analysis achievements OSS was to prove
inventive and innovative in another
capacity these were the products of the
research and development unit R&D headed
by Stanley Lovell quote dr. Stanley
Lovell in charge of the agencies
calculated mischief was a sunny little
nihilist his spectacles twinkling and
his chubby face creasing with merriment
and as he displayed his latest
diabolical devices this simple candle
could be placed by a female agent in the
bedroom of an amorous German officer
Lovell chuckled and would burn perfectly
until the flame touched the high
explosive contained in the lower half of
the candle this innocent-looking plastic
cylinder called the firefly dropped
furtively into the tank of a car by a
mucky filling station attendant would
explode after the gasoline had swelled a
rubber retaining ring if the vehicle
were a German tank Louisville had to
pause to wipe his spectacles and dab the
tears of laughter from his eyes the
occupants would be cremated before they
could open the escape hatch
this inner ometer a barometric fuse
attached to a length of hose packed with
explosive could be slid into the rear of
the fuselage of an enemy aircraft at
five thousand feet altitude
he explained Khalifa Lee the entire tail
section would blow off this limpid
fastened by a powerful magnet to the
side of a ship below waterline would
detonate when the magnesium alloy was
eroded by salt water long after the
saboteur had left the area it was used
effectively by the Norwegian underground
to sink Nazi troop ships in the narrow
fjords of Oslo and a Narvik Lovell
doubled up and slapped his knees at the
thought and sent untold thousands of
German soldiers to a watery grave end
quote
footnote Rd also produced or at least
considered a number of bizarre and
totally impractical schemes and devices
see Stanley P level of spies and
stratagems Englewood Cliffs prentice
hall
1963 in footnote in spite of the various
intelligence accomplishments of OSS not
everyone in Washington was happy about
the creation and existence of Donovan's
organization quote J Edgar Hoover
perhaps fearing that COI would steal the
spotlight long enjoyed by his FBI was
not satisfied until he had Roosevelt's
word that Donovan would be expressly
forbidden to conduct any espionage
activities within the United States
Nelson Rockefeller chairman of the State
Department's Committee to coordinate
inter-american Affairs once called even
more pretentiously the Committee on
cultural and commercial relations
between North and South America echoed
the FBI and seeking assurance that
Donovan would likewise be excluded from
his established bailiwick in the
southern hemisphere Major General George
V strong later chief of army g2 could
not understand that g2 represented
tactical military intelligence and seoi
strategic intelligence of all kinds and
strong therefore felt there was a
definite conflict of interests he
vigorously fought Roosevelt's proposal
that Colonel Donovan should be returned
to active duty with the rank of Major
General a grade more commensurate
with his new duties and offered the
irrelevant argument that Wild Bill was
too independent to be a team player if
there's a loose football on the field
strong protested he'll pick it up and
run with it
isolationist senators such as Burton
wheeler and Robert Taft
likewise opposed Donovan's advance in
rank and Taft rose on the Senate floor
to warn his colleagues of the danger of
White House control of intelligence and
investigative units realizing that the
suggested promotion might cause a
prolonged congressional fight Roosevelt
yielded at least for the moment and
Donovan took over as head of COI in a
civilian capacity end quote
though the president granted the FBI
exclusive intelligence jurisdiction over
South and Latin America OSS still made
forays into the region the rivalry
between the two agencies also
exemplified itself in other ways quote
in January 1942
Donovan's officers secretly penetrated
the Spanish Embassy in Washington and
began photographing the code books and
other official documents of Franco's Pro
access government Hoover learned of this
operation and was angered because the
COI men were invading his operational
territory the FBI did not bother to
register a formal protest while the COI
officers were making one of their
nocturnal entries into the embassy in
April two bi squad cars followed when
Donovan's men were in the building the
cars pulled up outside the embassy and
turned on their sirens the entire
neighborhood was awakened and the COI
interlopers were sent scurrying Donovan
protested this incredible FBI action to
the White House instead of reprimanding
Hoover Roosevelt's aides ordered the
embassy infiltration project turned over
to the bureau end quote
OSS
also restricted from entering the
Pacific Theater but not Asia by General
Douglas MacArthur the agency's
intelligence materials were utilized by
MacArthur in his invasion of and
returned to the Philippines Admiral
Chester Nimitz had a small OSS maritime
unit for underwater demolition action
with his fleet and another OSS Force
delivered special weapons to the 10th
army for the Okinawa landing but
Donovan's agents were otherwise
unauthorized to operate in MacArthur's
command area quote General MacArthur's
intransigence is difficult to explain
his personal relationship with Donovan
was cordial they had served together in
the rainbow division during the first
world war and both were highly decorated
heroes Donovan entertained the deepest
regard for MacArthur's brilliance as a
military strategist and never offered
any reason for his adamant opposition to
OSS but members of the agency had their
private theories some speculated that
Charles Willoughby MacArthur's
intelligence chief anxious to ensure
full credit for his intelligence unit
feared that Wild Bill would grab the
spotlight others held that MacArthur a
West pointer and firm believer in the
chain of command objected to the
presence of a uniformed civilian acting
independently in his theater a few
intimates who knew Donovan's own
determination suspected that it was the
inevitable clash between two strong
personalities equally fixed in purpose
end quote
footnote as commander of United Nations
troops in Korea in 1951 MacArthur also
refused to allow the Central
Intelligence Agency to operate in his
theater and footnote in spite of these
jurisdictional limitations placed on OSS
by the FBI and the army the agency
gathered its intelligence materials from
all over the globe by whatever means
available agreements were negotiated
regarding special operations by OSS at
the outset of efforts to liberate Europe
beginning with the North African
invasion quote
in planning the invasion political
problems posed themselves immediately
Roosevelt secured Churchill's agreement
that the landings codenamed torch should
be a predominantly American operation
with the United States handling the
diplomatic aspects the president and his
advisers believed that Anglo phobic
French commanders in North Africa would
offer less resistance to a landing led
by American troops with British forces
remaining in the background at the
Secret Service level a similar agreement
had been reached in June 1942 as part of
a comprehensive operational accord with
the British SOE Special Operations
Executive negotiated in London by OSS
Colonels Preston Goodfellow
and garland Williams an official of the
New York narcotics Commission in the
first of several wartime delineations of
spheres of influence for clandestine
activity OSS took primary responsibility
for subversion in North Africa as well
as China Korea the South Pacific and
Finland the British in turn assumed
temporary predominance in India West
Africa the Balkans and the Middle East
Western Europe was considered joint
territory and quote such agreements of
course were of momentary importance and
required renegotiations as new areas
came under liberation and whenever the
grand strategists shift their attack
objectives and designs for routing the
enemy in the midst of such planning old
jealousies and new antagonism flared
against OSS quote back in the early days
of COI London had been most cooperative
sharing its training facilities and
operational techniques with the
struggling new agency as OSS grew
stronger however sis the British Secret
Intelligence Service showed an
increasing reluctance to accept its
American counterpart as a full and equal
partner Britain's position was enhanced
by the theater commands lack of sympathy
with OSS objectives throughout
19 42 and 43 the practice of European
theater of operations was to rely mainly
on British intelligence and ignore OSS
offers of assistance
thus inadvertently aiding sis efforts to
subordinate the younger American
organization the u.s. theater of command
staff based their policy on Britain's
greater experience in the field but they
overlooked the fact that OSS could
provide new and different information to
supplement or even refute the
intelligence from other sources and
would serve long-range US strategic
needs best if it remained independent
the issue came to a head in September of
1943 when eto USA refused to give OSS
authority to conduct espionage on the
European continent unless it operated
under British supervision general
Donovan insisted that freedom from the
knowledge and influence of any outside
power was essential to the success of
his secret intelligence branch and he
strongly opposed the SIS efforts to
force an amalgamation in an appeal to
the Joint Chiefs of Staff he pointed out
that Britain's proposal suggests
coordination and agreement but as
employed here the word coordination
means control and agreement means
dependence this attempt of the British
by reason of their physical control of
territory and communication to
subordinate to the American intelligence
and counterintelligence service is
short-sighted and dangerous to the
ultimate interests of both countries end
quote as a result of his arguments a new
JCS directive on October 27 1943 gave
OSS full and unqualified authority to
operate on the continent eto USA
accordingly reversed its position and
the independence of American long-range
espionage was assured rather than engage
in destructive competition the British
yielded OSS special operations Esso and
counterintelligence X to greatly
strengthened their eto
and were given access to the extensive
files which Britain had taken decades to
develop in turn OSS provided funds
manpower resistance supplies three sub
chasers for Norwegian operations and a
squadron of Liberator bombers for air
drops to occupied countries
henceforth throughout the war American
and British intelligence worked in
productive though discreet partnership
on occasion unusual organization schemes
facilitated Donovan's efforts at
maintaining an effective intelligence
operation early in the war influential
German immigration to the United States
were recruited by shortwave research Inc
a co I front to broadcast anti-nazi
messages to their homeland to retain an
OSS foothold in China
Donovan found it necessary to agree to
creating the sino-american cooperative
organization headed by shang-chi shacks
feared and hated secret police chief Ty
Lee described by one OSS report as quote
not the Admiral Canaris of China but the
Heinrich Himmler end quote the deputy
director of the unit was captain milton
mary miles who while chief of OSS
far-eastern operations and commander of
Navy group china had befriended Ty Lee
the scheme was harshly criticized by the
theater commander General Joseph
Stilwell and his highly experienced
State Department political advisors John
Paton Davies jr. and John service the
new organization soon began to
disintegrate miles became hostile toward
OSS headquarters and autocratic in terms
of controlling OSS field operations in
China
eventually Donovan personally intervened
fired miles and challenged Ty Lee to try
and halt OSS agents operating in his
country Donovan also enlisted the help
of general Claire Chennault in
establishing independence for OSS
operations in China
and championing the agency's activities
and in the middle of neutral Switzerland
attached to the American Legation at
Bern as a special assistant to the
Minister was Allen Dulles an OSS master
agent literally surrounded by the Nazi
regime dispatched in November 1942
Dulles was instrumental in intelligence
gathering and directing special
operations within enemy territory from
February to May 1945 he served as the
negotiator and conciliator and efforts
which led to the unconditional surrender
of close to a million men occupying
northern Italy and the termination of
hostilities on that front
footnote C Ford pages 2 9 1 through 295
also see Allen Dulles the secret
surrender New York Harper & row 1966 and
footnote in the autumn of 1944 as Allied
troops continued to roll across Europe
and press closer to Japan in the Pacific
President Roosevelt sought Donovan's
thinking on the matter of a permanent
intelligence operation for the period
after the end of the war in response to
the chief executives request Donovan
offered the following classified
memorandum quote November 18 1944
pursuant to your note of 31st October
1944 I have given consideration to the
organization of an intelligence service
for the post-war period in the early
days of the war when the demands upon
intelligence services were mainly in and
for military operations the OSS was
placed under the direction of the JCS
once our enemies are defeated the demand
will be equally pressing for information
that will aid us in solving the problems
of peace this will require two things
one that intelligence control be
returned to the supervision of the
President to the establishment of a
central authority reporting directly to
you with responsibility to frame
intelligence objectives and to collect
and coordinate the intelligence material
required by the executive
branch in planning and carrying out
national policy and strategy I attach in
the form of a draft directive tab a the
means by which I think this could be
realized without difficulty or loss of
time you will note that coordination and
centralization are placed at the policy
level but operational intelligence that
pertaining primarily to Department
action remains within the existing
agencies concerned the creation of a
central authority thus would not
conflict with or limit necessary
intelligence functions within the Army
Navy Department of State and other
agencies in accordance with your wish
this is set up as a permanent long-range
plan but you may want to consider
whether this or part of it should be
done now by executive or legislative
action there are common-sense reasons
why you may desire to lay the keel of
the ship at once the immediate revision
and coordination of our present
intelligence system would affect
substantial economies and aid in the
more efficient and speedy termination of
the war information important to the
national defense being gathered now by
certain departments and agencies is not
being used to full advantage in the war
coordination at the strategy level would
prevent waste and avoid the present
confusion that leads to waste and
unnecessary duplication though in the
midst of war we are also in a period of
transition which before we are aware
will take us into the tumult of
rehabilitation an adequate and orderly
intelligence system will contribute to
informed decisions we have now in the
government the trained and specialized
personnel needed for the task
this talent should not be dispersed
William J Donovan director tab a
substantive authority necessary in
establishment of a central intelligence
service in order to coordinate and
centralize the policies and actions of
the government relating to intelligence
one there is established in the
executive office of the president a
central intelligence service
to be known as the blank at the head of
which shall be a director appointed by
the president the director shall
discharge and perform his functions and
duties under the direction and
supervision of the president subject to
the approval of the president the
director may exercise his powers
authorities and duties through such
officials or agencies in such manner as
he may determine to there is established
in the blank an advisory board
consisting of the Secretary of State the
Secretary of War the Secretary of the
Navy and such other members as the
President may subsequently appoint the
board shall advise and assist the
director with respect to the formulation
of basic policies and plans of the blank
three subject to the direction and
control of the president and with any
necessary advice and assistance from the
other departments and agencies of the
government the blank shall performed the
following functions and duties a
coordination of the functions of all
intelligence agencies of the government
and the establishment of such policies
and objectives as will assure the
integration of national intelligence
efforts be collection either directly or
through existing government departments
and agencies of pertinent information
including military economic political
and scientific concerning the
capabilities intentions and activities
of foreign nations with particular
reference to the effect such matters may
have upon the national security policies
and interests of the United States see
final evaluation synthesis and
dissemination within the government of
the intelligence required to enable the
government to determine policies with
respect to national planning and
security in peace and war and the
advancement of broad national policy
d procurement training and supervision
of its intelligence personnel e
subversive operations abroad F
determination of policies for a
coordination of facilities essential to
the collection of information under
subparagraph B here of and G such other
functions and duties relating to
intelligence as the president from time
to time made erect for the blank shall
have no police or law enforcement
functions either at home or abroad five
subject to paragraph three here of
existing intelligence agencies within
the government shall collect evaluate
synthesize and disseminate departmental
operating intelligence herein defined as
intelligence required by such agencies
in the actual performance of their
functions and duties six the director
shall be authorized to call upon
departments and agencies of the
government to furnish appropriate
specialists for such supervisory and
functional positions within the blank as
may be required seven all government
departments and agencies shall make
available to the director such
intelligence material as the director
with the approval of the president from
time to time may request eight the blank
shall operate under an independent
budget nine in time of war or unlimited
national emergency all programs of the
blank in areas of actual or projected
military operations shall be coordinated
with military plans and shall be subject
to the approval of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff parts of such programs which are
to be executed in a theater of military
operations shall be subject to the
control of the theater commander ten
within the limits of such funds as may
be available to the blank the director
may employ necessary personnel and make
provision for necessary supplies
facilities and services the director
shall be assigned upon the approval of
the president such military and naval
personnel
as may be required in the performance of
the functions and duties of the blank
the director may provide for the
internal organization and management of
the blank in such manner as he may
determine end quote
three months later on February 9th 1945
the isolationist press triumvirate the
Chicago Tribune the New York Daily News
and The Washington Times Herald carried
an article by Walter Trahan
characterizing the proposed agency as an
quote all-powerful intelligence service
to spy on the post-war world end quote
and one which quote would supersede all
existing federal police and intelligence
units and quote the column continued
with full quotations from the memorandum
and draft directive prepared by Donovan
the effect of the story was to raise a
multiplicity of fears about such an
entity being established and to also
unleash a profusion of jealousies among
the existing federal intelligence and
investigative units the source of the
leak regarding Donovan's communicate to
the president was thought to be FBI
director Hoover a second blow was
delivered to OSS in April when the man
who had urged its creation and had
remained appreciative of its mission
visa via the other intelligence
functionaries died suddenly in Warm
Springs Georgia in many ways the war due
to end in four months claimed one more
fatality in the case of Franklin D
Roosevelt but it also seized a president
who understood and championed the unique
intelligence activities of OSS the new
chief executive would be far less
appreciative quote it must be conceded
in fairness to Harry Truman that he had
never been taken into the full
confidence of President Roosevelt their
relationship was less than full or
intimate and deliberately or due to
carelessness he had failed to brief his
vice president on the dangers of an
intelligence gap in the dawning atomic
age whether it would have saved
Donovan's plan for a centralized and
independent post-war intelligence
service is questionable Truman was a
practical politician and he saw OSS as a
political liability because it gave the
opposition both extreme right and
extreme left
chance to attack the administration the
cry was on to cut the military
expenditure to disarm to bring the boys
home Roosevelt might have refused to
yield to public pressure but Truman
could not count on the same support of
the American people and quote without
consulting Donovan or the Joint Chiefs
of Staff
President Truman on September 20th
directed that OSS terminate operations
effective October 1st 1945 the Bureau of
the budget prompted by Secretary of
State James F Byrnes insisted on
relocating the RNA section of OSS within
the State Department to facilitate
research needs there quote and secretary
Burns's request dr. Langer came to state
in 1946 for six months to set up the
Intelligence Unit but the regional desks
were not particularly interested at the
time end quote
established as the interim research and
intelligence branch the unit became the
office of intelligence research in 1947
and the Bureau of intelligence and
research a decade later the Secret
Intelligence si and counter espionage X
two sections were transferred to the War
Department where they formed the
Strategic Services Unit which and one
experts view quote was nothing more than
a caretaker body formed to preside over
the liquidation of the OSS espionage
Network end quote quote only after the
integrated mechanism of OSS had been
scrapped and the majority of its trained
personnel who would have liked to
continue had drifted away and discussed
did the truth dawn on Truman that he was
no longer able to obtain overseas
information of the type available during
world war ii as general Donovan had
predicted a critical intelligence gap
had developed leaving the United States
far behind the other major powers so
urgent was the need for knowledge that
in January 1946 at far greater expense
and effort than would have been
necessary if Donovan's advice had been
followed
truman's set up an intermediate National
Intelligence Authority made up of the
secretaries of state war and navy and
the chief of staff to the president
under this agency was a so called
Central Intelligence Group C IG headed
by Rear Admiral Sidney sours an
acquaintance of Truman's from Missouri
whose intelligence background consistent
of a tour as deputy director of ona
office of naval intelligence and who is
said to have been instrumental in
persuading Truman to set up the ni a and
the CI G he was to be succeeded less
than six months later by Lieutenant
General Hoyt Vandenberg a capable
airforce strategist but equally lacking
in intelligence experience who in less
than a year returned to the Air Force
end quote while one Authority credits
OSS with a wartime budget of 135 million
dollars another expert source has
written quote from 1942 through 1945
excluding the salaries of members of the
Armed Forces on active duty with the
agency and a substantial part of
overseas logistics support the cost of
OSS averaged less than 37 million
dollars a year end quote
while much of the agency's money was
provided in unbowed funds there was
apparently close accounting of its
expenditure quote Donovan was the first
man to whom Congress made a grant of 25
million dollars without requiring an
accounting dr. Langer notes I recall the
morning when the general announced this
sent a staff meeting and at once turned
a cold douche on our relation this does
not mean he said that a single dollar is
going to be spent irresponsibly because
I know when the war is over this agency
will be in a very exposed position
unless its record is spotless for this
reason I have asked one of the leading
New York accountants to join the OSS and
he will see to it that all expenditures
are accounted for to me even though I am
under no such obligation to the Congress
end quote
however the Vigilant bookkeeping applied
to OSS expenditures does not seem to
have extended to the maintenance of its
membership lists quote no one can even
guess the actual size of OSS at its
wartime peak over 30,000 names were
listed on the agency's roster but there
were countless partisan workers in the
occupied countries whose identities were
never known who were paid OSS money and
armed with OSS weapons and performed OSS
missions yet for the most part were
unaware that their direction came from
Washington each field agent employed
several local sub agents and they in
turn recruited anonymous friends from
the surrounding countryside
sometimes numbering in the thousands one
lone parachutist ernst flows of chicago
who dropped into the Heric court
district of france wound up the war in
command of an underground force of 3,500
another French American agent named
Duvall organized and personally led an
estimated 7,000 resistance fighters in
the Lyon area altogether the mckeon
France the Kushina tribesmen in Burma
formed a worldwide shadow army which
served under OSS in close support of the
allied military effort and which faded
back into obscurity when the fighting
ceased end quote once he left the
directorship of OSS Donovan also began
fading back into obscurity in the years
immediately after the war he devoted
much of his time to the cause of
European federalism as chairman of the
American committee on United Europe he
was also a strong advocate for wrestling
the initiative from the USSR in the
so-called Cold War after serving as
ambassador to Thailand during 1953 in
1954 he worked as national chairman of
the International Rescue Committee to
assist refugees coming from North
Vietnam to South Vietnam and later in
1956 he organized a campaign to raise a
million dollars for Hungarian refugee
relief
never again was he called into service
as an intelligence leader speculation
ran high in 1947 with the creation of
the Central Intelligence Agency that
Donovan would be selected to directed
the new organization but the position
went to Rear Admiral Roscoe H
hillenkoetter the Central Intelligence
Group and again in 1953 when President
Eisenhower was searching for a new CIA
director to replace the departing medal
Smith Donovan's name was prominent among
the candidates but once again and for
the final time the call went to someone
else on this occasion to his old friend
and OSS colleague Allen Dulles six years
later on February 8 1959 William J
Donovan died in the nation's capital
[Music]
this is our hidden history
you